---
title:  "Hobby dev or Dev with a hobby?"
date: 2019-05-30 00:00:00 +0800
author: jimmy
---

Side projects? We don't need no stinking side projects... Or do we?

<!--more-->

## Killing Hobbies
I've been jobifying hobbies for most of my time in the workforce. 

I have spent most of my life camping, and in high school I started rock climbing in my friend's basement. So when I decided
working for my Dad wasn't what I wanted to do anymore, I found a job as a part time climbing guide and part time
backpacking guide. Turns out I didn't _love_ working as a guide, but I really liked working in that industry.
So once the guide season was over, I went and found a job working in a climbing gym.

In the 6 years in that industry, I can count on one hand the number of climbing trips I took purely for fun. And I could
probably say nearly the same thing for backpacking (I _might_ need the other hand for this one). These things that used
to be hobbies ceased to have the same draw. I was spending my time on the clock doing those things, I didn't want to
spend my time _off_ the clock doing them, too. So I didn't.

Fast forward to now, working as a web developer. I started out programming for fun and convenience, little things that
made my life easier, but mostly were just for fun. Now that I spend 6-8 hours a day doing this, I go home and do just
about anything _but_ programming for fun. This hobby of mine is now mostly dead.


## Mostly dead is still slightly alive
I was always good at my other jobs, I even eventually rose to management, but you know which people were _best_ at it?
The people who still chose to maintain its hobby status. The best backpacking guides were the ones who practically
lived in the woods. The best climbers were the ones spending their weekends at a crag somewhere, learning new skills
to translate into the gym. I don't know that I have been working in this field long enough to say with 100% conviction
that this is also true here. But I believe there are 2 types of people in this world: those who can extrapolate from
incomplete data.

It may be that I'm wrong for 90% of people in this job, but I think for me, with my history, and my situation, maintaining
hobby status is one of the most important things I can do for my career. Because I'm self taught, there are still a lot
of things I don't know. A lot of questions I don't even know I need to ask. There is definitely plenty of learning that
takes place on the job, but I'm limited in what I can learn by the problems I need to solve at work. And because there
is often a deadline, I don't get to explore _every_ possible solution to a problem. I pick one and implement it and move
on to the next problem. Hobbies are different. There isn't really a deadline. There isn't the same constrictions placed
on you. You can afford to do it wrong _many_ times. And each "wrong" attempt is not a failure, simply a learning experience
for how _not_ to solve the problem. (Insert one of the many variations on Thomas Edison creating a light bulb in 1,000
steps/finding 1,000 ways _not_ to make a light bulb, you get the idea.) So as someone who started in this field as a hobby,
the way to continue to progress in this field, for me to become the best I can be at it, I need to revive my hobby, after
all, it is only mostly dead. And mostly dead is still slightly alive.

So with that said, I think it's time to call in Miracle Max, time to pick up the hobby again. It is time to bang my head
against my keyboard for fun again. It's time to storm the castle.
