---
title:  "Git Gud!"
date: 2019-04-10 00:00:00 +0800
author: jimmy
---

I am no git wizard, not even adept really. I know just enough to "git" by. ;) Let me regale you with a tail of my git
shenanigans and you can help me "git gud".

<!--more-->

The title of this post is really an admonition for myself more than anything else. As someone who has worked as a 
"professional" programmer for a whopping 5 months, git is still, largely: `¯\_(ツ)_/¯` Sorcery?

Those of you reading this may hear my problem and think, "You dolt, if only you had done &lt;enter simple solution here: 
snark optional&gt;" and if that is you, I cannot stress this enough, _please_ let me know what that solution was. In the
mean time, let me paint you a picture of my problem and the steps I took to solve it.

## The Scenario
I was working on making some large improvements to a website that multiple people here have there hands in as well. So
like I'm supposed to, I branch off develop and start making my changes, we'll call this branch feature. While in 
process, I discovered that a couple pages I was working on, as well as a couple I wasn't working on, were all vulnerable
to some XSS attacks through user input markdown.

Since fixing this was adjacent to what I was actually working on, and affected more than just where I was making
changes, I decided to fix it separate from my current branch. So again, I branched off develop (this branch we'll call
xss), made my fixes, and merged these changes back in to develop. Now I needed this fix in my current branch, so I
pulled develop into my feature branch and continued working. 

A couple days later, I took a break from working on feature and spent a little time working on some UI updates on
multiple pages. So again, I made a new branch from develop, let's call it ui, and I started making my changes there.
Once they were complete, we squashed and merged them into develop. As before, I wanted some of these UI changes on my 
feature branch, so I pulled develop into feature once more. And here is where things got weird.

## The Weird
First, I noticed as soon as I pulled develop into feature, almost _all_ the changes I had made to feature were
reset to the state the files looked on develop. Mind you, neither ui nor xss had made any changes to these files
so there shouldn't have been anything in the changelog that created conflicts. I wasn't even warned of conflicts. I
simply ran `git pull origin develop` on feature and feature was almost completely reset to its original state.

Now I thought, this is _weird_. So I reset feature back to right before I had merged in develop and used git's cherry
pick feature instead to only grab the specific commits off of develop that had the correctly changed files. But now 
feature's changelog included these commits I picked off develop, so when I created a pull request for feature into 
develop, all the changes I had cherry picked from develop showed up in the PR as new changes, muddying the water of what
changes feature was actually making, and making code review that much more difficult.

## The Solution
This was the solution I landed on, whether or not this is the right one, I'm not sure. First, we figured the problems
must have arisen from the fact that when we merged ui into develop we did a squash and merge, not just a straight
merge. Mostly this guess comes from the fact that when I merged xss into develop and then develop into feature,
I didn't notice any loss of progress on feature, but after squashing ui, now develop was making weird changes to
feature. If squashing wasn't actually the cause, I would love to hear what was. _But_ the solution that ultimately
succeeded: git rebase. Here is my understanding of why that fixed it.

```
The Problem:
  to here <--- this was reset
  |            |
  v            v
  /-----/------/  feature
 /     /      /<--where things got weird
|-----/------/    develop
 \---/\     /     xss
       \---/      ui

How rebasing changed things:
              /------------ feature
|-----/------/  develop
 \---/\     /   xss
       \---/    ui
```

Rebasing feature on to the new state of develop (in my understanding) shifted the branch off point forward. This way,
instead of having to merge various states of develop back into feature (where changelogs seemed... funky?), as far
as git is concerned, feature has only ever been built on develop _after_ all those updates to develop were created.
This worked, I got all the fixes from develop without resetting anything on feature. Huzzah! I live to code another
day. 

Hopefully this won't have far reaching consequences on branches or PRs in the future. I can't foresee how it would,
but then, up until a week ago, I couldn't foresee how trying to merge changes from my base branch into my feature branch
could break things either. So I really don't know what I don't know. If this somewhat convoluted tail of my failures
was helpful or interesting to you, let us know! And more importantly, if you can foresee doom in my future due to my
chosen solution, or if you know of a better one _please_ let us know. I'd love to learn more about this tool I use
everyday and barely understand. I'd love to git gud!
